Offer the mandala, so if you have the daily prayers, page 24.
The earth anointed with perfumed water and strewn with flowers, Mount Meru and the four continents,
ornamented with sun and moon. By offering them visualized as a Buddha field,
may all sentient beings enjoy the pure land, idam guru ratna mandala kam niyata yami.
According to the wishes of sentient beings and their capacities for the high and low,
common and uncommon vehicles, please turn the wheel of Dharma.
We make that request humbly and joyfully to our precious gurus, the precious lamas of
the lineage, and like we always begin with the lama, unrepayable kindness, only remember
the lama, unrepayable kindness, only remember the lama, unrepayable kindness, only remember
the lama. And so with that great joy, that great appreciation,
big, big bodhicitta, not just that we're being of benefit, but by receiving the teachings
and applying them to our own minds and hearts, all beings can know true peace, remove the
darkness of their ignorance and be liberated in their natural state of peace and joy without
grasping and with that great confidence and joy and devotion to that just innate purity
of our total experience and especially of that of our teachers, you know, who just begin
our practice, maintain our practice, conclude our practice.
And last week I think Lama Drampa really beautifully was addressing some questions that came and
in particular looking at this questions that came up around this beautiful prayer we say
and recite during our weekly sessions as well as many of us in our daily practices, this
prayer called calling the lama from afar, which is in the the nundro book, page 18.
And I think the person writing had a few questions and I think Lama Drampa just like I said very
beautifully, very kindly, but lots of encouragement kind of address some of the questions around
just when we're presented with this big view and realization, you know, kind of kind of
not feeling discouraged, but how to, you know, connecting with being encouraged.
And I also just thought that some of these other questions, they're good questions and
they were questions that came.
And so I definitely wanted to just bring them up because they seem very worthy.
So I just have to call them up, I'm going to sing them a jig here.
But I'll read them and then we can continue.
Okay, sorry.
So I'll just read these questions, or, you know, thoughts, and then just give a little
reply.
Again, it's only my reply, but here we are.
Definitely all of these are things for us to contemplate ourselves, you know, I'm reflecting,
we all have heard so many teachings and practices, so reflecting.
So the prayer of calling the Lama from afar, and then the person is saying first asking,
I think the basics of it is to know and experience the Lama is within us.
Is that true?
And there's so many words that are esoteric to me, such as then the second question, which
she's asking about what is this youthful vase body that's mentioned in the prayer.
And then again, another third question, the prayer begins with requests to the Buddha's
Lamas of the Three Caias.
How do these three enlightened beings correlate to the Three Caias?
In other words, who are these three Buddhas, Yeshe Dorje, Dachen Dorje, and Drodo Lingpa?
Why are they representing the Three Caias?
Good question.
And then the rest was the questions I think Lama Dropa kind of addressed kind of those
points yesterday.
So question one with the Lama within us, is this true?
Yes, definitely.
Like Rinpoche say, and of course, I can talk a little now, but in Rinpoche's book, Illuminating
the Path, this commentary on the Dojum Terso Nundra, there is one of the first chapters,
a very brief and very beautiful kind of teaching on calling the Lama from afar.
So there's more in-depth answers to these questions right there, right here in this
book.
And like Rinpoche say in that, this prayer calling the Lama from afar, it's like looking
into a mirror in that sense, or like I was thinking, Kenshin Pauldin, Shera Rinpoche,
he often just delighted in the meanings of words.
And he always, I can remember a few times when talking about the Guru and Guru Yoga,
he always like with a glint in his eye and laughing with spell it, "Gee, you are you."
And that just really delighted him.
So there's a little teaching reflecting there.
But I think the important thing with all of our practice we have to remember basis is
really reflecting at least recalling and hopelessly establishing more and more in our mind streams,
in our familiarity, these four seals of all the Buddha's teachings and practices.
Yes, the Buddha is within.
The Lama is within.
However, there's no intrinsically, substantially, permanently existing anything is a really
fundamental view right in the Buddha's teachings.
That all phenomena is illusory, all phenomena is impermanent.
That samsara, ignorance, attachment, ego clinging is what equals samsara.
And therefore, there may be temporary comforts in samsara, but by definition, because we
have our basic ignorance of how things truly are, samsara is suffering in vast ways.
But the deepest way is that down deep, deep, deep, deep, deep, deep, deep, deep, deep anxiety
due to just the great illusion that we exist, right?
So samsara is suffering.
And then the fourth seal, when we see things as they are, when we're familiar with things
how they are, which is beyond coming, going, birth, death, happiness, sorrow, beyond all
that, the indestructible nature, the non-dual, absolute nature of our mind, of bodhicitta,
is peace.
Nirvana is peace.
And it's those great beings such as Kenchen, Palden, Cherub, Rinpoche, Kimpose, Gondondo,
Rinpoche, His Holiness, Dudrim, Rinpoche, Dingo, Kensei, Rinpoche, all these great masters
growing up, Vimala Mitra, Padmasambhava, Buddha Shakyamuni, Yashai Sojal, Mandarava, all these
great beings have realized, they've done the work, they have realized, brought to fruition,
that realization of the true nature as it is.
And that is the lama.
Like if we remember the word meaning of lama, is the Tibetan word lama, Sanskrit word guru,
la is like high, ma is like, in one way is like nothing or negation, nothing higher.
But then also Rinpoche mentioned too, ma also engenders being motherly, being caring, compassionate
.
So the supreme, caring one, the supreme, highest realization of bodhicitta and realization,
and the outer level is the lama, fully realized that's our outer lama, who through that great
kindness and our good connection, we shows us that like we say, the nature of our own
mind, the Dharmakaya of our own mind, and ways to become more and more familiar with that.
That's the outer lama, who's showing us our inner lama for sure.
And then the second question, I guess too, I'll just take a step back in that same vein
too, this just calling the lama from afar, remembering too, for we ordinary beings with
our conceptions and way of framing things, we're working with that dream, the Buddha's
blessings are not far. They're timeless, both timeless and also very timely and skillful,
blazing realization and compassion of our precious teachers. It's not far at all. It's
all pervading, three caiyas, all pervading. And as Kimpo Sei Wong, Dondyo Rinpoche has
pointed out, calling the lama from afar isn't so much like calling the teacher from some
remote place, come here, come here, you know, it's more so calling the lama from afar is
kind of waking up to that all pervading, blazing compassion and wisdom that's with us. Kindling,
bringing up our devotion, our bodhicitta, kind of, it's not the lama who's far, it's
maybe more me who's zoned out. And so waking up, calling, rejoicing, reflecting on the
teachings, that's where all these so many beautiful, spontaneous prayers and composed
prayers of calling the lama from afar are, these prayers of devotion. Again, devotion
and blessings go, in a way, they're one and the same. They go both ways. It's like there's
a story of the great teacher whose student asks, "O Lama, Lama, give me blessings."
And the lama said, "Student, student, give me devotion." And I think a really important
thing to remember in that statement is that wasn't the lama being arrogant and contractual.
He was pointing out the nature of devotion and blessings. Like the teachings say, devotion
opens our minds and hearts to receive the blessings that are inherently all-pervading.
And if we kind of can be that courageous to open ourselves and bring out our bodhicitta,
how beautiful. So that was just a little reflection on that first part. Yes, it's showing us our
own dharmakaya nature, our own sambhogakaya nature, our own namanakaya nature, calling
the blessings of the fully enlightened teacher who shows us that. And reflecting and relaxing
with that meaning, again bringing, removing the veils of obscuration to bring out the
Buddha nature, all of our practice, removing obscurations, bringing out our innate wisdom.
So youthful base body was the second one. So youthful base body, many of us have heard
the term, it comes up a lot, especially in the Dzogchen teachings. And the youthful base
body is referring here, in this specific prayer, it's referring to the dharmakaya nature of
our own mind, right? The essence, primordally unchanging, the innate nature free of all
elaboration, dwells as the youthful base body, the originally pure profound clarity. So the
youthful base body is also another word for our Buddha nature. So it's referring here
to our dharmakaya nature, but our Buddha nature, the nature of our mind, open, vast, uncontrived,
one yet full of clarity and brilliance. And that's called youthful. And here we're talking
about the youth, youthfulness that's beyond coming or going, that's beyond aging, that's
beyond birth, beyond death, that kind of great youthfulness, immortal, deathless state. And
then the vase, the body and the vase, like that Buddha nature, this is kind of a metaphor
for our Buddha nature. The youthful base body in one way is like, there's a vase, you know,
closed bumpa. And inside the bumpa is this youthful body, Buddha nature. But it's just
due to our obscurations, we don't see it. Or like Rinpoche said, like if there was a candle
or a light inside a clay vase that was sealed, we don't see that light. And then another
part of the metaphor is also, if there's a vase, the space inside the vase is equal to
the space outside the vase. And that shell is kind of just like maybe like our our misunderstanding
or our obscurations. So as we practice, as we learn, as we contemplate, as we meditate,
we kind of reduce our obscurations and create little cracks, and maybe the lights shining
out a little more, the great space is equalizing more. The youthful Buddha nature is revealed,
but it was always there, just not seen, right. And then I think her next questions were around
the three Kaya aspect here. So I'll just say a little bit about that too. I just made a
couple of notes so I didn't totally lose my train of thought. So yeah, the Dharma Kaya
Lama, Dharma Kaya Lama, Yeshe Dorje, be aware of me. Please grant blessings to attain great
confidence in the view. Here Yeshe, Yeshe Dorje, this first part is of course this referred
to as Dharma Kaya Awareness and the Dharma Kaya Lama. And again, this, the three Kayas,
the Dharma Kaya, Sambhogakaya, Normanakaya, they're not three separate things. They're
three aspects of the nature. The Dharma Kaya is like that, like it says here, the unchanging
uncontrived openness. Sambhogakaya is the spontaneously arising clarity. Normanakaya is through
that
union of emptiness and compassion emanating to benefit beings according to their needs.
They're not three different places. And likewise, these three Lamas aren't three different Lamas.
They're three, again, reflecting on different aspects of the realization of the great outer
Lamas, as well as our three Kaya nature, the openness, the uncontrived, innate nature, free
of elaboration of our Dharma Kaya mind, that naturally unceasing, luminous clarity, just
ceaselessly, spontaneously, blissfully, luxuriously, always arising inseparable from that Dharma
Kaya. And then this Normanakaya, the compassion appearing to beings as needed without any
bias equally for everyone according to needs and totally free of any limitation. Those
are the three Kayas, right? Then the three Kaya Lama, the three qualities of the three
Buddha realizations are the three qualities of the nature. So Yeshe Dorje is here in this
part referring to Yeshe, the primordial wisdom, Dorje is the Vadra, indestructible awareness
of primordial wisdom, the primordial wisdom that's indestructible. Again, the youthful
vase body beyond birth, death. That vastness is Yeshe Dorje, Dharma Kaya Lama. Be aware
of me, but also may I be aware of you. May I be aware of you, Dharma Kaya Lama. May I
be aware of my own Dharma Kaya nature as well as aware of our great teachers, right? And
then all of these three names are also different names. It's a way of connecting with Duryamrapashe
,
His Holiness Duryamrapashe, Jiggyal Yeshe Dorje. So Yeshe Dorje is one of His Holiness Duryamrapas
he's
names, as far as outer Lama goes. And this name arose from the time when Duryamrapashe
was conceived. Right around the time Duryamrapashe was conceived, his father had a dream. And
in the dream, a Dakini appeared to him and gave him two things. He gave him a melon,
a mirror, beautiful clear mirror, and a Vajra, a Dorje, and said, "This is his name." And
then the father knew that that meant his name was Yeshe Dorje. The mirror was like that
profound, limitless, uncontrived, open clarity of the Dharma Kaya and the Vajra, the indestructible
awareness. So that's one way of connecting. So this is the deep, deep meaning that transcends
any one person of our Dharma Kaya nature is this indestructible wisdom, primordial wisdom,
great openness, the great Prajna Paramita. And then also, specifically, our great teacher
Duryamrapashe was given this name by his father from this dream he had when the Dakini gave
the mirror and the Dorje to him. And then let's see, some Bhoga Kaya Lama. "The nature
unceasing conjoined configuration of luminous clarity dwells as the display of the spontaneously
present five certainties." Ooh, there's a lot in that line, isn't there? But let's
just keep it simple and just say everything arising, all that clarity, vivid, you know,
again the Dharma Kaya isn't an empty blank state, our own mind, right? We look to our
mind, we can't find it, and yet it's full of awareness, full of clarity, you know, everything.
And then the deep, deep teachings, everything is that Sombhoga Kaya arising clarity that's
equally empty in nature. Spontaneous, free Sombhoga Kaya is like the body of luxuries,
it's luxurious, it's rich, it's the body of bliss, you know, again not bliss we cling
to, but just the natural expressive energy of the nature. Dei-Chen Dorje, Dei-Chen Dorje,
the indestructible great bliss is what Dei-Chen Dorje means. Dei-Chen is like Dei-Waa-Chenpo,
Dei-Chen great blissfulness that's indestructible. Is that Sombhoga Kaya nature, the luxurious
body, a rising energy of the nature? And again we're praying, please be aware of me, and
may I be aware of that, may we all be aware of that, may we all have our Sombhoga Kaya
realization. And you know, really get to know our meditation and see things clearly as they
are. And then also again, this was another name of Joja Mirampashe, and I think the full
name was Je-Drung. No, the full name was Jig-Dral, sorry, Jig-Dral Kunzong Tin-lei Dei-Chen Dorje.
And this name came, was bestowed upon Joja Mirampashe by, there was a great turton whose
name was Je-Drung-Sampad-Jung-Nay. And after the previous emanation of Du-Jum was Du-Jum-Ling-Pa,
really great, great turton who was right before his own as Du-Jum Mirzhe's life. And so many
of his students were unaware that he had been reincarnated or a tuku of Du-Jum-Ling-Pa had
appeared, which is in, what's in Pemako. And there's a beautiful place on the mural here
at Padmasami-ling showing when his students finally met him. But this great turton Je-Drung-Sampad-
Jung-Nay,
he was aware of the tuku of Du-Jum-Ling-Pa. And it was he who, when he sent the students
to go meet the tuku, he had a long life prayer and in that long life prayer, that's where
he named this name. De-Chun Dorje arises from that in one way. So again, we're also remembering
the life of this great teacher and great student and great example of the Dharma in Du-Jum-Ling-Pa.
The Nermanakaya Lama, Dro-Du-Ling-Pa, be aware of me. So that again, that great compassion
from that unity of emptiness and appearances of vastness and clarity, openness is the Nermanakaya,
it's the all-pervading compassion that appears to beings according to needs. It's the Nermanakaya,
so Nermanakaya, the compassion without bias, the primordial wisdom free of all limitations,
dwelling as the essence of all-pervading naked awareness, emptiness. Nermanakaya, Dro-Du-Ling-Pa,
be aware of me. So Dro-Du-Ling-Pa. So Dro-Wand is like the wanderers, the jib, you know,
the wandering beings, sentient beings of the six realms, it's the Dro. And then the Du-Dru-Dul,
it implies one who brings peace and calm, tames the wild ones wandering, brings them
peace and safety and calm. And then the Lingpa is like that, like a pure land, a safe haven.
So the one who brings calm and safe haven to wandering beings is the Nermanakaya, who appears
in all kinds of ways as a supreme Nermanakaya, such as Guru Rinpoche or Buddha Shakyamuni. But
ultimately, when we really apply the teachings in the view, everything we experience is the
blessings of the Nermanakaya Lama. It's the perfect situation for us to wake up, release
and purify our misunderstandings and bring out our wisdom and our bodhicitta, make it
strong and natural. And then again, Dro-Du-Ling-Pa is also a name of the great teacher, Dudram
Rinpoche, who composed this poem. Dro-Du-Ling-Pa is actually the name he was given when he was
enthroned by Guru Padma Sambhava and Yashisojo as a turtan. They gave him that name. So Dro-Du-Ling
-Pa
comes from the name Besto-Dupandu-Dudram Rinpoche by Padma Sambhava and Yashisojo. And then
I think later one of his teachers gave him, reaffirmed that name when he entrusted him
with all of his lineage of teachings. So that's a little bit touching on those questions.
That turtan's name was Zil-Nun Namke Dorje, who also gave, kind of reaffirmed that name
of Dro-Du-Ling-Pa to Dudram Rinpoche when he enthroned him. And again, that Nermanakaya
was safe. So those are some of the answers to those little questions. And I just thought
to add, though, again, getting to that point, just reflecting on the meanings of these teachings
so beautiful and really bringing it into our practice as we're teaching, as we're practicing,
stirring those seeds, bringing that big, big view into our minds and hearts, really, truly,
this precious connection we have, like we say, remember the lama, remember the lama,
remember the lama, incomparable kindness, unrepayable kindness, remember the lama.
What could be kinder than someone showing us our true nature and giving us the means for our own
liberation? There's nothing kinder. It's so true. And that's all wisdom, right? Bringing out our
wisdom. And then the three kaya state, realizing the three kayas is the ultimate wisdom. It is
Buddhahood. We study, we contemplate, absorb, absorb the teachings into our practice with our
meditation. We're introduced to this big view of the nature of things as they are. And then we're
given means to kind of really become more familiar and see how it's true for ourselves directly
through our meditation. And that's all supported with our conduct and by doing virtuous deeds,
avoiding negativity, accumulating merit. So wisdom is so that's the essence, bringing out our
wisdom,
but of course it needs those supports of actually studying, contemplating, practicing, meditating,
bringing out the wisdom. You know, like we kind of referred to before, really bringing
these four seals of the Buddha's teachings, reflecting on them, seeing how much, just checking
in with ourselves, how much we're doing that. Again, me, myself at least, am a wandering being
with aspirations and reverence and devotion, but still a little one, a little wee babe.
But yeah, we have a sense of self being truly autonomous and existing.
So we need to remove that that obscuration, right? It's the cause of samsara, first noble and
second
noble truth. And what was the third and fourth to actually find the cessation to realize and see
things as they are. We assume that all conditioned phenomena is truly existing. And it's not
according to the teachings, right? But when we begin to use the methods of analytical meditation,
we can begin to bring out that's called wisdom or insight, you know, and seeing how everything's
impermanent. And that really, we're not going to find ultimate happiness in samsara, we're just not
because samsara isn't a place. It's a misunderstanding. So really, that's wisdom,
bringing out our wisdom, so important, our insight, vipashana, supreme seeing.
And the wisdom, right, is just one of the three trainings.
There's also a trainings in proper conduct and concentration. So concentration,
really developing, making sure I'm talking to myself, and encouraging all of us, really do
spend time, it sounds kind of so obvious, but I know I find myself, you know,
distracted and tight and all those things, you know, but really, concentration, shamatha,
calm abiding, really, really working on developing our concentration is so beautiful and so
important.
You know, like Vimala Mitra has a beautiful teaching where he goes through the stages of
shamatha and vipashana and the virtues and qualities. But you know, the point is to bring
out wisdom, but without calming down, you know, due to all of our these misperceptions, I just went
over, contrary to how things are, you know, we're wandering anxiously, constantly, so easily
distracted. It's almost like the that blur is how we can stay identified. You know,
it's so kind of contrary to what we really wish, which is peace.
So that's why it's so important in all Buddhist meditation, right, just to remember it really
bring comes down to shamatha and vipashana in this shamatha, calm abiding, just really, really
learning
how to deeply with our body, with our energy, with our speech, with our mind, relax, but relax
and stay aware and relax and be able to maintain a focus and to be able to concentrate, which means
not be distracted. You know, that's like, you know, when we're able to do that, that's like a
candle
or a lamp in a room, that's still, as opposed to like a birthday candle in in the wind, you know.
And by having that really good base, then our vipashana is what's going to really,
like, we can be calm and undistracted and bring out the true insight into the three kaya state.
So just really spend time before, during, checking in with, relaxing, concentrating
and opening. The essence of shamatha is holding, the essence of vipashana is
releasing. And then ultimately, we're doing them both. So that's all I'll say for now. I've really
talked too long again. I hope this is helpful. So again, it's unrepayable kindness.
Remember the lama. And then when we do our guru yoga, what are we doing? We're receiving all those
blessings. We're receiving the four empowerments, which are nothing other than in receiving the
blessings to realize our dharmakaya, our sambogakaya, and our manakaya, and all of them inseparable
,
to realize our full Buddhahood is what we're doing when we're doing our guru yoga,
resolving that duality. So again, thank you. We'll just for a moment do some silent meditation,
just reflect, relax. Again, maybe, like I was just mentioning, we can just spend a few moments
relaxing, again, just having, being mindful of our body's posture. When we have good posture,
our winds and our energy can move freely. And when our energy can move freely and unimpeded,
our mind can settle with open senses, letting our concentration here being aware of our body,
supported by the ground, open to the sky, breathing.
[BLANK_AUDIO]